# 2023-10-03 Meeting Minutes
_S153, Sir Alwyn Williams Building at 14:00_  
_Sederunt: Thomas Mathieson, Dr John Williamson_
## Last Week's Progress
 - Thomas summarises his progress over the last week:
   - He researched into different visualisation libraries and how Jupyter Widgets work
   - There are some interesting complexities with how Jupyter Widgets work which explains why IDEs such as VSCode and 
     PyCharm struggle to render them.
   - John acknowledges that he's also encountered compatibility issues with Jupyter widgets before
   - Thomas reviewed different graphics libraries/bindings available for python (OpenGL & WebGL).
   - He collected example shaders and reference GLSL functions from ShaderToy to use to build the GLSL library and to 
     serve as examples.
   - He tested headless OpenGL rendering in Google Colab
   - We discussed adding a compatibility layer to directly support ShaderToy shaders; John thinks the uniforms provided 
     by ShaderToy are well-chosen.
   - We discuss some of the example shaders Thomas collected and some of the other python visualisation libraries. 
     ITKWidgets was of particularity as it uses remote rendering to integrate in Jupyter, which is an area of interest 
     for this project.
   - We discussed the different graphics libraries available:
     - _PyThreeJS_, is a good library for WebGL, it provides nice abstractions but also raw access to shaders, so it 
       would make a good starting point if we wanted to use WebGL. But it doesn't work in PyCharm.
     - _PyGlet_, has bindings for OpenGL as well as OpenAL, FFmpeg, and a few other multimedia libraries. It's a fairly 
       heavyweight library.
     - _ModernGL_, has fast nicely designed bindings for OpenGL and is focussed on programmable pipelines. Thomas is 
       especially interested in this one. It supports headless rendering and windowing.
     - _Glumpy_, binds to OpenGL and numpy which has its advantages but is a little inflexible compared to ModernGL.
     - |
     - John has used all three of these [OpenGL] libraries and tends to agree with Thomas' evaluation; he warns though 
       that writing things for the programmable pipeline is really annoying, as you need to wrap things around functions 
       which can be painful.
     - He says ModernGL is really good, using the ModernGL-window library you can do windowing and PyIMGUI (DearIMGUI) 
       can be used for UI. The disadvantage being that it doesn't run directly in the browser window, but this is a 
       point for discussion.
   - Thomas also gathered some miscellaneous reading material to reference in his dissertation.

## Questions
 - With regards to remote rendering in Google Colab, it seems to work, but it always seems to use the software 
   renderer instead of the GPU. According to StackOverflow, using ModernGL on Google Colab should automatically use 
   the GPU, but it doesn't in our case. It's possible that Google have disabled it, though this seems unlikely. In 
   DirectX this is easier to debug as you can explicitly specify the graphics adapter to use. For development purposes 
   though, the software renderer is still fine, but may have an impact when it comes ot evaluation.
 - Thomas goes on to discuss the architecture of Jupyter widgets and the messaging and data model behind them. The 
   efficiency of serialisation for communication from the python kernel to the web browser is a concern, it affects 
   both the OpenGL and the WebGL approach, though the OpenGL approach is much more sensitive to latency.
 - John suggests that it would makes sense to do some testing to see what the latency/bandwidth is like. Thomas says 
   there's probably still a use case for both methods as the performance of each is very dependent on the amount of 
   input data into the shader to render.
 - Thomas is tempted to go ahead with remote rendering as it still has many advantages, particularly with low-power 
   devices rendering the notebook. He mentions his previous employer also has experience with remote rendering, and 
   he could ask them for guidance.
 - John thinks it's an interesting direction to go, especially as he doesn't think there's another tool like it. He 
   can see the potential benefits when using it in class on a low power laptop.
 - It might be nice to support both OpenGL and WebGL, although we would have to work around the compatibility 
   differences.
 - We could also have a standalone backend that just brings up a ModernGL window.

## Next Week's Plan
 - Thomas plans to work from the Jupyter widget template on GitHub to integrate ModernGL and test out PNG streaming. If 
   he has time, he could also try out H.264 streaming, but this is much more complicated to get setup. In an ideal world 
   it would be nice to be able to share GPU resources directly with the browser instead of having to do a GPU-CPU copy, 
   video encoding and back, but it's the only way to support remote rendering.
 - He also plans to start researching shader preprocessing, the plan is still to look into using a modified 
   C-preprocessor, but he needs to research exactly what the requirements are of it. 
   - John mentions that the C-preprocessor is a good starting point, but is old-fashioned. And asks what a modern 
     C-preprocessor would look like: what useful things are there, macros are better, parametric support, etc... Thomas 
     mentions that the C-preprocessor has the advantage of familiarity which is very beneficial. John mentions 
     potentially running the preprocessor multiple times until it converges for nested macros.
## Overall Schedule
 - The plan would be roughly as follows:
   - Jupyter Widget
     - PNG Streaming
     - H264 Streaming
     - Mouse/Keyboard interaction
     - Other interactivity?
   - Shader Preprocessor
     - Research
     - Implementation
     - ...
   - Standalone Functionality
     - Serve as a headless server for unsupported Jupyter clients?
     - Standalone windows?
     - Video rendering?
     - Large image rendering?
   - Shader Library
     - Preprocessor templates
     - Math utilities
     - Text utilities
     - Interactivity utilities
     - ...
   - Custom Jupyter Shader Cell
     - Jupyter/JupyterLab
     - VSCode
     - Syntax highlighting/linting

_Meeting adjourned at 14:43_
