# 2023-09-18 Meeting Minutes
_S153, Sir Alwyn Williams Building at 10:00_  
_Sederunt: Thomas Mathieson, Dr John Williamson_
## Introductions
 - John asks why Thomas chose this project
 - Thomas explains that the project falls nicely into his areas of interest and expertise
 - We discussed both of our visions for the project
   - Thomas suggests that the project could be a python library for Jupyter which would work a bit like Jupyter, but 
     with more advanced visualization and probably larger data handling.
   - The Glumpy library which John had suggested in the project description looks to be a good starting point as it 
     provides bindings to OpenGL and NumPy.
   - John talks about wanting to be able to upload data to the GPU and using GLSL shaders render some visualisation; 
     integration with Jupyter would also be useful.
   - A library of commonly used functions such as those used for SDF rendering could be made available as well. But the 
     focus is on the data visualisation, so advanced text rendering and the likes is not a requirement.
## Problems to Solve
 - We discuss examples of visualisations:
   - Signed distance field rendering, with iso-lines
   - 3D surface rendering with contour lines
   - Smooth spline rendering
   - Point cloud rendering
 - We talk about Thomas' previous experience with shaders (using ShaderToy, RenderDoc, etc...)
 - The final user experience requires a balance between providing enough low level access to be flexible and performant 
   (such as raw fragment/vertex shaders) while also providing enough abstractions to make it useful to people who aren't 
   graphics programmers. John suggests that providing access to GLSL shaders (or potentially some DSL that compiles to 
   it) along with a library of standard functions could be a solution. This is an area to brainstorm later.
 - Glumpy only offers bindings for OpenGL, which can't be used with Jupyter, if a library existed which could bind to 
   both WebGL2 and OpenGL that would be ideal. Otherwise, we're going to have to decide on which API to target.
 - John points out that in the case of wanting to do data visualisation in a Google Collab document, the data would be 
   on the remote server and not necessarily on the client's machine. Thomas suggests that we could do server-side 
   rendering and stream the rendered visualisation to Jupyter over H.264.
## Next Steps
 - The next steps for the project will be to:
   - Do some reading to find out: what kind of things do we want to visualise, what solutions already exist, how might 
     people want to use this library.
   - Play around with existing libraries to see how they can be used (eg Glumpy)
   - Mind map potential ideas for the project
