# 2023-09-26 Meeting Minutes
_S153, Sir Alwyn Williams Building at 15:00_  
_Sederunt: Thomas Mathieson, Dr John Williamson_
## Last Week's Progress
 - Thomas gives an overview of last week's progress:
   - Mindmapped a few ideas
   - Experimented with ideas for integration with Jupyter
   - Researched other data visualisation software/libraries
   - Researched example use cases/datasets
   - Setup project repository and issue tracking
 - We discuss the mindmap in more detail:
   - To support Jupyter Thomas suggests looking into using WebGL or WebGPU, we could use a particular library for this 
     (such as ThreeJS), but given the low level access we intend to use, it might not be necessary.
   - Thomas mentions that WebGPU is a modern framework which gives low level access and allows supporting features such 
     as Compute Shaders; John suggests that WebGPU is probably fairly complicated to get up and running and might limit 
     mobile device support. Mobile device support is a choice and Thomas suggests that if we're planning on doing high 
     performance rendering anyway, maybe this shouldn't be a target platform?
   - Using OpenGL server-side (ie not the browser rendering the notebook) and streaming the rendered results to the 
     notebook could be an interesting approach. A big benefit would be that the dataset to render wouldn't need to be 
     copied to the browser (in the case of a Google Collab notebook this could be very beneficial if the data stays on 
     the remote server). The challenge with this is rendering headless and then hosting the video stream on the server, 
     which might not be possible on Google Collab anyway; more research is needed here.
   - Thomas suggests that adding a custom GLSL cell type to the jupyter notebook could be interesting (though possibly 
     challenging) for the UX; it would allow for proper syntax highlighting for GLSL shaders. John thinks this should 
     be feasible.
   - We both agree that a node based shader graph wouldn't be ideal both for UX and feasibility/Jupyter integration 
     reasons.
   - Thomas suggests that a simple C-preprocessor-like language could be used to facilitate code generation for certain 
     types of visualisation (similar in concept to Unity surface shaders); John agrees this is a good approach.
   - We go over some of the proposed library functions in the mind map, they all seem interesting and worth pursuing.
   - We discuss the potential benefits of supporting geometry shaders, namely mesh generation from points or lines.
   - Thomas states we probably want to support data input from a variety of sources (Pandas dataframes, numpy arrays, 
     images (2D, 3D), etc...); John suggests this is probably an unnecessary complication and that it would probably be 
     sufficient to just support input from Numpy arrays (which in itself may already be challenging due to the numerous 
     data types and dimensionality).
 - Thomas presents a screenshot of a mockup of what a notebook using the library could look like; John likes the idea.
 - We discuss other libraries such as VTK which has solves similar problems but is fairly different in its lack of 
   shader support which makes it fairly opinionated and inflexible in the types of rendering it can do.
## Questions
 - Thomas states that at this point it would make sense to start pruning the mind map a bit so that we can focus on more 
   interesting areas. It might make sense to cut server-side rendering already if it might be infeasible; John suggests 
   that researching why it's infeasible could make an interesting point in the dissertation.
 - Thomas asks if John has any suggestions of particularly interesting or challenging datasets to visualise.
   - John suggests point clouds and 3d surfaces (heightfields) could be interesting. And that visualising data over time 
     is quite important.
   - John also gives the example of plotting multiple sets of EEG data (a grid of electrodes with data over time).
## Next Week's Plan
 - Examine the feasibility of server-side rendering and how it would integrate into Jupyter.
 - Start pruning the mind map (probably through further research), to establish a more concrete plan.
 - Gather more example data.
 - Experiment with more small prototypes.
## Overall Schedule
 - At this stage of the project this is still a little unclear.
 - With the project being fairly modular though, once we have a good idea of the stating point to work on, we should be 
   able to form a more concrete plan. 
 - John suggests it would be good to get a small prototype prepared as soon as possible, so that it can already be 
   tested by new users.

_Meeting adjourned at 15:47_
